Now, we'll discuss additional ways in which we can improve on the portfolio optimization.
Let's think about the covariance matrix of factors.
If we have 70 risk factors in our model,
then the covariance matrix of factors is a 70 by 70 square matrix.
The diagonal contains the variances of each factor,
while the off-diagonals contain the pairwise covariances of two different risk factors.
In general, it's good to have a healthy suspicion of correlations and covariances,
and to ask if correlation data adds information or just more noise.
One way to be conservative about the information in
a covariance matrix is to shrink the covariances or even reduce them to zero.
In other words, we could keep just the variances along the
diagonal and set the covariances in the off-diagonals to zero.
In the case where we're using the covariance matrix in a risk factor model,
there's also some additional intuition for why we can use
just the variances and discard the covariances.
The goal of the optimizer is to reduce the portfolio's exposure to these risk factors.
So if the optimizer reduces the portfolio's exposure to
risk factor one and also reduces its exposure to risk factor two,
then it's less important to know exactly how factor one varies with factor two
since the optimizer is already working to reduce portfolio exposure to both factors.
In other words, you can still achieve the goal of reducing
portfolio exposure to all the factors if you're using just the variances,
whether you include the factor covariances or not.
You may wonder, "What are the benefits of throwing
away the information about covariance?"
In addition to making your model more
conservative and limiting possible noise in your data,
a diagonal matrix also makes matrix operations more efficient.
This theme of computational efficiency is one that you'll come
across in many use cases including backtesting.
Backtesting is a computationally and time-intensive process.
So the more efficient you can make it,
the more quickly you can test your alphas and iterate to make improvements.